Viking sailors, as early as the first century BC, may have discovered a miraculous talisman
known as Sunstone.
Narratives about historical figures of that time suggest that this stone could be used
to locate the position of the Sun even on the cloudiest of days.
Whether or not such navigational techniques were used remains a bit of a debate among
archaeologists.
But there are those who believe that this apparently fictional and fantastic stone is
not myth, but historical reality.
They believe that it's this, a piece of Icelandic spar, also known as the mineral calcite.
Calcite is unusual among common minerals because of a property called birefringence.
Calcite has the ability to refract light at two different angles depending upon the orientation
of the electromagnetic waves making up the incident light.
Those waves oscillating perpendicular to the surface of the stone refract at an angle different
than the others, and this creates a second image when one looks through the stone.
This is a curious phenomenon, but what does it have to do with navigation, or for that
matter organic chemistry?
Scientists now know that light from the Sun which penetrates the Earth's atmosphere undergoes
a process known as scattering.
Scattering happens when light encounters small particles in the air.
Some familiar effects of this scattering are the blue color of the sky in the daytime and
the reddish and orange hues of sunset.
But a second effect, one which most of us are probably not familiar with, is polarization.
The scattering that goes on as the light enters the atmosphere causes light which reaches
the surface to have waves which are not randomly oriented, but rather are polarized or preferentially
oriented in a direction which points back to the source, in this case, the Sun.
A human eyes aren't capable of detecting the difference between polarized light coming
directly from the Sun and diffuse light coming from other directions.
But with its strong birefringent properties, calcite is.
By scanning the horizon looking through the stone and comparing the intensities of the
images one sees, a skilled navigator can pick out the direction of the Sun on even the most
overcast of days.
Now the notion that the ancient Norse sailors used this technique to navigate is a very
romantic tale, but the problem has been lack of direct evidence in the form of archaeological
samples of calcite from sites dating to 2000 years ago.
There are those who believe that the calcite sunstones were used by these people and simply
weathered away over the centuries erasing all direct evidence that they ever existed.
Others still believe that the stories are pure fiction.
It is certain, however, is this.
In 2002, a block of the mineral calcite was found in the wreckage of an Elizabethan ship
called the Alderney.
The Alderney sank in 1592.
Perhaps the most remarkable thing about the discovery is the fact that this stone was
found just a few feet from other navigational tools, a tantalizing find.
But another tantalizing observation was made by physicist Guy Ropar at the University of
Wren in 2013.
Ropar was able to demonstrate that when properly trained in its use, a group of everyday people
were able to determine the azimuth of the sun on a cloudy day to within one percent
of its true location.
If such a stone was ever used by the Vikings or Elizabethan sailors, one thing is certain.
By the eve of the Industrial Revolution, some 300 years after the sinking of the Alderney,
the technique seems to have been lost to the ages.
Now we owe its rediscovery in the early 1800s to a French soldier, engineer and physicist
Etienne Louis Malus.
In the wake of discoveries by Ritter and Herschel, Malus, as the story goes, had taken an interest
in optics and was contemplating the optical properties of minerals like that Esleinik
spark crystal I just showed you.
One day he was observing the beautiful properties of this material outside Luxembourg Palace.
Now what Malus noticed was that if he looked at various objects through the crystal, he
could see light of the same intensity regardless of how he rotated it.
But then he turned and faced the palace and again rotated the crystal, looking at the
light reflected by the palace's windows.
What he saw was remarkable that the intensity of the transmitted light changed as he rotated
the crystal.
Clearly, something about the process of reflecting sunlight was changing more than just the direction
of its propagation.
When nonpolarized light strikes a smooth surface, like a window at a very specific angle, and
this angle is also, by the way, specific to the material, now some of the light is reflected
from the surface, but some of it is also refracted through the surface.
When the reflected beam and the refracted beam are at a 90 degree angle to one another,
the reflected beam will be plane polarized with all of its constituent waves parallel
to the orientation of the surface.
And what Malus saw through his Icelandic spar sample was simply his crystal either allowing
that plane polarized light through when its edge was properly aligned or blocking it from
view when it was not.
So here is a sample of Icelandic spar or calcite.
And I have on the table in front of me a small image.
Now when I look at the image without my Icelandic spar, I see, of course, a single copy.
But placing the spar on top, I can see a very clear double image.
The source of the double image is the fact that light of different planes of polarization
is interplaying with the crystal in different ways, reflecting and reflecting, refracting
at different angles.
Now if there's any doubt about this, it can be easily proven using a modern polarizing
filter like the one I have here.
If I look down through this filter at my Icelandic spar at the image on the other side,
simply rotating my plane polarizing filter, I can make one image appear and the other
disappear and vice versa simply by changing the arrangement of the plane of polarization
which is allowed through.
This is the principle on which polarized sunglasses work.
Polarized lenses like the one I just used are made by creating long, carefully oriented
polymer molecules which are dyed to produce striations too small for the human eye to detect.
These striations give the coating a polarizing effect.
The coating is oriented on lenses so that it preferentially absorbs light which is plane
polarized parallel to the ground.
In other words, it reduces the amount of road or ground glare you experience in your car
or on the ski slopes.
So we've seen how plane polarized light can be generated by passing light through polarizing
media like the Earth's atmosphere or reflecting it from a flat surface.
We've also seen how it can be detected by turning a second polarizer to either block
or allow the plane polarized light to pass through.
But we're missing one last critical piece of the puzzle.
How does plane polarized light interact with organic samples?
What critical questions can we answer with plane polarized light that we couldn't answer
otherwise?
Well, our tour of optical spectroscopy techniques has taken us through UV visible spectroscopy
which can be used to monitor energy difference in molecular orbital systems and IR spectroscopy
which allows us to detect the presence of functional groups and also to fingerprint
organic molecules using the distinctive signature vibrations of their carbon skeleton.
So we have the tools to probe certain structural features of molecules with light.
But we have not yet addressed the question of chirality.
Of course, we know by now that chirality is a critical property of many organic molecules.
From drugs like thalidomide to the proteins in your body, the profound importance of molecular
handedness has been a focal point in many of our lectures.
We've discussed how Chris Engel had a prolific run at characterizing the SN1 and SN2 mechanisms
in the late 1920s, helping chemists to develop strategies to design syntheses which lead
to products with a desired stereochemistry.
But so far, we've not covered how Engel could distinguish between the two different enantiomers
and determine their relative populations in an otherwise pure sample.
The UV visible and infrared spectra of R and S-thalidomide, for example, are expected
to look exactly the same.
Of course, determining whether a product is an anti-opure or racemic or anywhere in between
for that matter can be critical to our understanding of the mechanism which formed it.
The key to determining the relative abundance of two enantiomers in an otherwise pure sample
is a technique called polarimetry, which relies on one very interesting property of chiral
molecules.
They have the ability to rotate the plane of polarization in polarized light.
Now, a modern polarimiter conducts an experiment not terribly different than the one conducted
by Malus two hundred years ago in France, although the parts are much smaller and the
lamp life is less than ten billion years like the sun.
Malus used the sun as a source of light, the windows of the palace as a polarizer, a crystal
of Icelandic spar as the second polarizer, and his own eyes as the detector.
So the goal in our experiment is going to be to first create plane polarized light and
then to determine or verify the plane of its polarization.
And to do so, all we need is two pieces of polarizing media and a light beam.
Now these are modern polarizing media, they're filters that can be used just like the coating
of sunglasses, for example.
So if I hold one of these up, you can still see through it pretty well.
I'm still there, right?
But the light that was going through this polarizing filter was exiting with only one plane of
polarization, although of course the camera couldn't tell.
So in order to tell that I've plane polarized the light that's moving through my filter
from my face, I can use a second polarizer.
See if I align them parallel to one another, the image makes it to the other side.
But if instead I align them perpendicular, the light can't traverse the second polarizer.
So if I want to know the plane of polarization, I have to rotate my second polarizer until
it is properly aligned with the first.
This gives me a way to actually measure and detect the plane of polarization of polarized
light.
Now a modern polarimeter would use some type of a source lamp rather than the sun.
Frequently we use sodium lamps because they create just several different wavelengths of
light themselves.
Nonetheless, for our polarimetry experiment, we want only one wavelength of light to get
into our experimental sample compartment.
So we'll place a monochromator after the lamp.
Now in our case we're going to use our monochromator to isolate just one wavelength of light known
as the sodium D-line, 589 nanometers.
Alright now after this I'm going to place a polarizer in line after the monochromator.
The polarizer, much like the windows of the palace, ensures that only one plane of polarization
makes it into my sample compartment.
So at this point we have plane polarized light of a single wavelength and countering a sample.
The path of the beam finally passes through a second polarizer on its way to a detector.
So if there's no change in the orientation of the plane of polarization, the rotational
position of the second polarizer will have to be exactly the same as the first polarizer
to maximize the amount of light reaching the detector.
So if we were to rotate the second polarizer, when the flash of light is observed by the
detector, we know that the plane of polarization of light exiting the spectrometer can be measured.
Now, small organic molecules in solution aren't aligned like polymer strands in sunglasses
though.
Instead they tumble and move randomly, so they do not preferentially absorb plane polarized
light like a pair of sunglasses.
They do however interact with plane polarized light in a different way.
See chiral molecules have the very interesting ability to rotate plane polarized light.
As a plane polarized light beam of a specific wavelength passes through a chiral sample,
the plane of polarization rotates so that when the beam exits the sample, the plane
of polarization has a new orientation.
So let's go back to the polarimeter.
So here we have my operating polarimeter where my lamp monochromator and polarizer generate
my monochromatic plane polarized light which traverse an empty compartment and exit through
another polarizer which is oriented in exactly the same angle as the first, so my detector
is firing away letting me know that the plane polarized light is getting through.
Now let's place a sample in our polarimeter.
Now placing a sample inside my polarimeter means that the beam will rotate, the plane
of polarization, now the beam itself is still going straight, but the plane of polarization
of my beam is rotating.
That means that my instrument has to rotate the second polarizer to let the exiting light
get through and reach the detector.
So my instrument has rotated that second polarizer until the detector sees a maximum intensity
of light.
We call the angle between the initial and final planes of polarization alpha.
This is the measured optical rotation and it's very simply measured by taking the first
polarizer and the second polarizer and comparing the angle in between the two.
We call this ability of chiral molecules to rotate plane polarized light optical activity
and just as the ability to absorb light is an intrinsic property of a compound, so is
its optical activity.
This is to say that a given chiral compound rotates a certain wavelength of light by a
known and constant amount.
We call this the specific rotation of a compound and usually label it as a bracketed alpha
with 20 and d annotations indicating that we're talking about the specific rotation
of a compound at 20 degrees centigrade and in reference to that sodium d emission line
which is 589 nanometers.
So our observations so far lead us to derive an equation which is very similar to Beer's
law.
Just as absorbance is equal to the extinction coefficient times the path length times the
concentration in Beer's law, so rotation of an enantiopure sample is equal to its specific
rotation times the path length times concentration.
So if I have a solution of 1 gram of enantiopure R-camper dissolved in 1 milliliter of solvent
in a 1 decimeter cell, knowing camper's specific rotation of 44.4 degrees per gram per mill
decimeter allows me to calculate that I should see a rotation of 44 degrees clockwise.
Fantastic.
So let's say that I do just that with a pure sample of camphor.
I place the sample in the polarimeter, I collect my reading and the rotation is only 22 degrees.
So what just happened here?
I have pure camphor, but the observed rotation is less than the calculated rotation.
Well what's going on here is that there's another form of camphor, the Esenantiomer,
which rotates plain polarized light with equal efficiency but in the opposite direction because
of its handedness.
So this is where polarimetry deviates from Beer's law.
You see in UV visible spectroscopy, there are no anti-absorbers which re-emit light
absorbed by their counterparts thus cancelling them out, but in polarimetry there is such
a counterpart, the other enantiomer of the compound.
So for every degree that our camphor molecule rotates plain polarized D-line light and S-camphor
rotates it back to the opposite direction to the same extent undoing that rotation.
This explains why a pure sample of camphor may rotate plain polarized light less than
expected.
We have to include a term in our equation which accounts for the opposing rotation of
the minor enantiomer.
Now both terms of the equation share the same optical rotation and path length.
So we can separate these algebraically and arrive at an equation which works for samples
of a compound which aren't enantiopure.
Here we have observed rotation equal to the specific rotation of the compound times the
path length times the difference in concentrations between R and S enantiomers.
This difference is also called the enantiomeric excess.
Journal articles covering chiral synthesis will always include a measure of the enantiomeric
excess of the desired chiral product reported as a percentage simply calculated by dividing
the observed rotation by the calculated rotation and multiplying by 100%.
Now it's worth pausing here to note that the enantiomeric excess of one stereoisomer
is not the same as its total abundance in the sample.
In our sample we had an observed rotation of 22 degrees and a calculated rotation of
44 degrees.
This makes the enantiomeric excess or EE of the R camphor in our sample 50%.
But the total amount of R camphor in our sample is that excess plus half of the remainder
since the remaining 50% of our sample were molecules of camphor which were canceling
one another out.
So the total abundance of the R enantiomer is 50% plus one half of the remaining 50%
for a total of 75% R enantiomer.
Now in general when organic chemists report their results in an article it's assumed
that the reader can conduct this manipulation on their own so we usually see just a report
of EE and not one of total abundance.
The technique of polarimetry had early and profound influence on the link between chirality
and biological systems.
Louis Pasteur famously used this technique in 1848 to analyze tartaric acid salt crystals
isolated from wine.
Pasteur's experiments showed very clearly that biologically sourced tartaric acid had
the ability to rotate plain polarized light.
But tartaric acid synthesized in the laboratory did not.
So in fact what was going on here was the term racemic was coined this way because it
refers to an equal mixture of enantiomers and it's derived from the Latin for bunch
of grapes because of this observation, a testament to the role of tartaric acid in our understanding
of chirality.
This lack of optical activity was a conundrum which led Pasteur to take a very, very close
look at synthetic tartaric acid.
When he did he noticed that carefully crystallized tartaric acid actually forms two different
shapes of crystals.
It was only when he painstakingly separated these crystals into two different groups by
hand that he could recover the optical activity of tartaric acid.
Examples of one shape could be combined to produce the optical activity of the tartrates
recovered from wine production and the other, quite interestingly, though not surprising
to us now, showed equal and opposite activity.
So this may be the very first example of a chiral separation.
Fortunately, we have better methods today than tweezers and careful observation that
Pasteur had to use.
But all of these methods find their origins in Pasteur's realization that the same compound
can have two equal but opposite, optically active forms or enantiomers.
But polarimetry has contributed even more to our understanding of organic reactions.
One classic example of this is the work of Saul Winston, a Canadian chemist with a deep
interest in carbocation.
Winston spent much of his career investigating situations in which this familiar reaction
intermediate seemed to act in ways that it shouldn't.
One of these situations takes place in certain SN1 reactions.
Winston used polarimetry to recognize that not all SN1 reactions proceeded with a total
loss of stereochemistry, even though most of them in fact do.
Winston was able to show, using polarimetry, that the same SN1 solvalysis reaction run
on a chiral substrate in solvents of differing polarity not only proceeds at differing rates
but with differing degrees of racemization.
This is to say that a chiral substrate might produce a racemic product when reacted in
higher polarity solvents, but with maybe a 50% EE when run in lower polarity environments
in which a carbocation ion would be less stable.
This led Winston to theorize the existence of concerted ion pairs in certain reactions,
in which positively charged carbocation ions and negatively charged leaving groups still
form but stay close to one another in what he called an intimate ion pair.
So if a nucleophile attacks before the ion pair fully separates in space, the leaving
group, though detached, can still block the face of the carbocation from which it came.
Now this explains the lack of total racemization in a reaction showing SN1 kinetics, and it
changed our way of thinking about the SN1 and SN2 mechanisms.
See thanks to Winston's work and the technique of polarimetry, we realize now that nucleophilic
substitution mechanisms are not necessarily an idealized SN1 or SN2, but rather a continuous
continuum of mechanisms ranging from the classical SN1 with total racemization through SN1 involving
ion pairs and having partial conservation of chirality to classical SN2 with complete retention
of chirality.
So let's review what we've covered today.
We started with a bit of history, discussing how Etienne-Louis-Malus is often credited for
first observing plane polarization of light from the sun using a palace window and a piece
of Icelandic spar as polarizers, although Viking navigators may have actually beaten
him to it by about 2,000 years.
We saw how modern polarimeters operate on the same basic principles as in Malus's experiment,
but the wavelength and plane polarization of the analytical beam are more controlled.
We investigated the ability of chiral molecules to rotate plane polarized light, and we saw
how their specific rotation is equal and opposite for two enantiomers of the same compound.
It's this equal and opposite relationship which allows us to observe the optical rotation
in an otherwise pure sample, comparing it to the calculated optical rotation of the sample
to determine the enantiomeric axis, remembering that the enantiomeric axis is not the same
as total abundance.
Finally, we took a look at the work of Louis Pasteur and Saul Winsteyn, two scientists
separated by a century, but both of whom were able to draw critical inferences about chirality
in organic compounds by observing the interaction of plane polarized light with those compounds.
Next time, we will move to yet another region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
We're going to take a look at the phenomenon of nuclear magnetic resonance, and how tiny
atom-sized magnets in organic molecules interact with radio waves, and one another, to produce
an effect which has become one of the gold standard identification tools of modern organic
chemistry.
I'll see you then.